Hi welcome back.
In this video we are talking about debugging.
Particularly, using the pycharm debugger.
The term debugging actually comes from
one of the first computers that was built.
You know, computer back in the day were massive
behemoths, taking up entire rooms.
And their cabling was actually just exposed.
It turns out that a moth flew into one of the cables
and some of the transistors there.
It caused the short circuit.
Hence, the term debugging was coined.
It is actually removing bugs from the cables
or in our case, from the code,
so that our programmes don't crash and don't perform badly.
So we are going to try to remove
any bugs from, say, our programme here.
And lets imagine that our bug is that
we have misspelt this metrics click
and it should be clicks
because that is what the data is like.
So, lets imagine we don't know that
and we are tying to find out
what this problem could be like,
or what this bug could be caused by.
Naturally we have a nice exception handling here,
but as you can see we've not reraised the exception.
So all we are going to see is incorrect values provided.
We are going to look through our code
and so forth, and we are not going to find anything.
We eventually reach the point
where we are going to have to debug.
To debug, what to do is to make sure that the correct
file is selected, right click it and press debug.
Now, debugging is just going to run
your application, your file as normal.
So right now, if we right click and debug,
it's going to load up.
It's going to be a bit slower
than just running the application
because there are a few more things
happening in the background.
And then we are going to see
incorrect values provided to our calculation function.
Because of course, we've got that key error
caused by the incorrect key being used there.
Now, if we weren't able to realise that this is misspelt,
we might decide to set a break point.
A break point allows our programme to stop at any point,
and we can check values of things
and we can run functions and see what breaks.
This error here, is raised by
the performed calculation function.
We know that because it's the only thing
that is running in this line.
We know that this is the thing
that must be causing the error.
Otherwise, it would not be caught by this key error here.
So, we can set a break point,
and in order to do that,
just go over to the left here beside line thirteen
and just click it.
Then a red circle will appear, the line will go red,
and this tells you that
you have set a break point on line thirteen.
Lets run the debugger again,
you can either right click and press debug user score
or now that this has just recently ran
you can press the bug icon here.
Or of course, you can go to the top right
and press the bug icon.
Make sure that the right thing is selected,
user score, in order to do that.
Now, we can see that our programme has stopped.
It stopped here on the break point,
the line is now blue,
that tells us this is the current line that we are running.
The line has not ran yet.
So we have stopped just before the line.
The break point will always stop just before the line.
We can see that our user parameter here,
has a value of user rolf.
We cannot select this text here,
think of it as some floating info.
It just tells you what the value
of the variables in scope currently are.
It's really handy.
And notice how this uses that repr function.
Earlier on when we talked about repr and str fucntions,
I told you the repr function
was most useful for development purposes
and this is why.
Because whenever you see a variable
pycharm is going to show you the repr
of that variable when it is telling you the values of it.
If you open the debugger tab here on the left,
which may be open by default,
you'll see a bunch of stuff.
And it can be pretty scary the first time you see it.
The most important part here,
is these variables and these buttons up here.
The variables, once again,
tell you what variables you've currently got in scope.
Inside this function we only have one variabal,
that's the user parameter.
Here you can also open it up using this triangle
and then it tells you all the properties of the user
at this point in time, currently,
before we have executed this function here.
Remember this function is meant to update the user score
but it has not ran yet, so it's still zero, as it should be
from the init method that was called earlier on.
You've also got the engagement metric,
which is a diction, we can open that
and it tells you the clicks key
and the hits key and their values.
You can also up the name and you can see that it's rolf.
You get a lot of information from these things
including their types, dict, int, str.
The length of the dictionity,
and you get these numbers here
that you don't have to worry about for now.
We now know that, on running this function,
an error is going to happen.
We know that because this error
was being caught on this line
and that's the only function that is running.
So there are a few things we can do.
The first thing I would do,
when encountering this thing here, is to use the calculator.
This is the expression evaluator.
What that is used for is running any arbitrary python code.
Were going to select the entire thing after the equal sign,
that's perform calculation including user.engagement metrics
Just select it, you don't need to copy it or anything.
Then press the calculator icon.
Now you've got the expression evaluated
and it's pasted in the thing that you've just selected.
So that's perform calculation with user.engagement metrics
as the argument.
You can run this code, lets press evaluate.
Notice how now we get this key error click.
That is pretty cool.
The console, which is, by the way,
behind here on this console tab, does not show anything.
It doesn't catch the error or anything like that
because this is a completely separate run time, if you wish.
So this is not running our programme,
this is just running this function here,
completely separately using the data
that you've got in your scope.
That's what you can use, the user variable here.
We get a key error, which is click.
So now we've got a bit more information,
we know that the click property is incorrect.
Okay, lets say that that doesn't tell us enough information
and we want to stop here inside this line.
Just to look at what the metrics object is.
Well, there are two ways you can so that,
you can set a break point in that line,
and remember the break point
is going to make you stop right before the line executes.
So the error won't happen yet
when you stop at this break point.
If you set a break point there,
you can press continue, resume programme execution,
that's this icon over here, the play icon.
You can press that and that is just going to continue
your programme until the next break point
or until it terminates, if you don't have a break point.
So you can set a break point and press continue.
Another option is for us to use these buttons here,
these are really useful.
This first one here, steps over to the next line in the file
So what's the next line after this one,
not the next line that we run,
but the next line in this scope.
The next line will be this, print
because the exception is going to be raised
by this this function here, this line.
So when we raise the exception,
were going to go into the except.
I'll show you exactly what happened.
See, we are going to the except,
nothing happens here of course
and then we can step over again,
and now we are inside the exception block.
Step over moves onto the next line
in the current scope, the current block.
So it will just go over into the next one.
If you are within a function,
it will stay within that function.
If you are in a class, it will stay within that class
and so forth.
Now, we are already too late,
the error has already happened,
so we are no longer going to be able to go back here.
If we now set a break point inside this line
and we press continue, we already passed that.
So what were going to do is
this break point here is going to get ignored
and we are just going to resume the programme execution
until the end.
Let's press continue now.
As you can see, the programme continues,
the blue line has disappeared
and the console now has this little, small
yellow arrow there that tells you that
hey, new control output has happened
since you last saw this tab.
When you click on it, it disappears.
Now you can see the output of your programme.
Incorrect values provided to our calculation function.
Nothing new there.
I'm going to remove the break point on line 22
and run the programme again, debugging the programme again.
Once again, we will stop
at our original break point in line thirteen.
Except now, we are going to go into step into.
Step into takes us into the function
that we are running in that line.
If we are running multiple functions it'll take us
into the first function that runs on that line.
But here, we are only running one function
so step into takes us into the function
and now this line is blue.
This is the line we are currently running.
Notice how now the metrics parameter, here.
We also get the contents of it.
Clicks is 61 and hits is 100.
For me, this is as far as I would have to go,
of course, before noticing that clicks and click
are completely different strings, there's an s missing there
So then you would just change this to an s
and you would rerun the programme.
Change it to an s, notice how now that disappears
because we've made a change.
You can just rerun the programme by
pressing this button here on the left.
Now we are back at our perform calculation break point.
We can step over, in order to move over to the next line
and now we know that we should move into the else line.
That's what happens indeed
because there is nothing there on the else,
it just moves on to the next line
that actually does something which is this if.
Now here, we've got the user.score,
which was set by this line above.
If we open up user, we can see that the score is 505.
So my 502 earlier on was completely wrong.
It's 505 but it is greater than 500,
so once again, we can step over
and that will take us into the next line in this function
which is send engagement notification.
Now that we're here, we know that
we are going to send the engagement notification
because this is the function that is about to run.
If you want, you can step into and that takes you into
the send engagement notification function.
Potentially, if this was doing something more interesting
you could, of course, have a look at it.
If you want, you can select this f string entirely.
You can run the calculator and evaluate it
and see what it's going to give you.
This is totally fine and a lot a lot of the development
is happening on the debugger when I'm at work.
You're constantly, sort of, debugging
and making small changes running the calculator
to see exactly what do I want to include in this function.
Once you figure it out with the calculator,
just put it in and that simplifies development quite a bit.
By the way, this button here is step out.
It takes you to whatever function called you
where you are right now.
So if you step out, now you are here.
But this function has already ran,
so that is important.
Now, in this line you are after the function.
Not before it.
So if you were to step over,
now you would exit the function entirely.
Then you go back to right after the function
that you called which brought you into there.
I'm going to remove this break point, by the way.
So now we are after this function.
If we press step over we are going to end the programme.
As you can see all the blue lines that appear
and now we see, in the console,
the notification that was sent to our user.
Once again, I'm just going to debug the programme
with he break point
to give you an overview of what we've seen.
What we have seen is that we can set break points
and that causes a programme to stop when we are in debug mode,
not when we are in normal play mode.
If you are in normal play mode,
break points are going to be ignored.
You can set a break point by clicking the line
and that's going to stop your programme there.
You've got access to all of the variables
in the current scope.
Pycharm is nice enough to give you their values there.
But you can also see them down here in the variables tab.
You can open them up and have a look at them and so forth.
You've got the calculator icon,
on which you can run any arbitrary python function you want.
Or indeed, you can just look at values of things,
like you can type user
and that's going to give you the user values.
You can also modify the values, if you want.
You can say user.score equals 200.
This returns none but now you can see,
down here in your variable,
that your user variable now has a score of 200.
It is blue to tell you its just changed
between now and the last time
you pressed one of these buttons.
Down here, you've got your threads.
I wouldn't worry too much about this,
it's just the trace of where you've been.
You entered this function in here.
This is the function that called
the function you're currently in.
This here is the function that called your file.
This here is the function that called
the function that called the your file and so forth.
As you can see, python, here,
these with the yellow background, by the way,
are the ones that you didn't write.
These are python.
There is something here about setting up a debugger
and running it and so forth.
Nothing you have to worry about.
But, nonetheless,
these things are what called your file originally.
You'll normally be interested
only on the ones with a white background
that's these two.
This is the first line that ran in your programme
related to where you are now.
And this is the second line, the one where you are now.
Of course, we've looked at restarting,
continuing, which goes on to the next break point,
if there is one, or run until the programme finishes.
You can, of course, stop
and that just terminates your programme.
You can step over,
which goes onto the next line in this function.
You can step into,
which goes into the next function that runs,
in this case, perform calculation.
And you can step out and that brings you from a function
out into the function that called you right after it.
There's a few more buttons there,
feel free to experiment with them.
Its nothing that you have to worry too much about,
those are really the main ones.
When you are debugging, make sure to go slowly.
Set break points, look at values,
run functions to make sure
that they are doing what you expect.
That way, you're going to be able to deal with errors
and any problems in your programmes, really really easily.
Most of the time is spent debugging.
Just remember that.
Don't treat this as a secondary thing
that you only do when you're in trouble.
Use it and love it and I promise it will pay off.
So that's it for this video,
I just wanted to show you how to debug using pycharm.
So. I'll see you on the next one.